Slocan Statement: Towards A Charter for the Fediverse



The following is intended as a starting point, a first draft towards
establishing a shared charter that would serve to protect, support, and enrich
the nascent Fediverse.



The federation of online services, known as “the Fediverse”, agree to the following:

By operating a network that connects to the fediverse by way of recognizing and
leveraging the freedoms of online identity and communication and agreeing to
principles of data interchange:

  We agree to maintain, in perpetuity, an open interface that ensures the
continuation of these freedoms of online identity and communication in
accordance with the principles of data interchange.

  We agree that software and standards written to support federated systems will
be published with licenses and agreements that require adherence to these
principles.

  We agree to obtain necessary license(s) from users in order to allow the
redistribution of content created by members across the fediverse provided that
correct attribution to the original creator is maintained.

  We agree to neither federate nor provide services to any organization that,
having agreed to these principles, later withdraws from this charter.

In order to ensure that online communities have the autonomy to self-determine
and individuals have the ability to freely communicate, free from the tendency
of dominant nodes in the network to leverage network effects as a monopolizing
strategy.



Definitions

1. The freedom of online identity – to use and present a federated online
   identity (A "Name") to any federated system – is considered a fundamental right.

  a. Organizations that grant names to individuals agree to do so in trust.

  b. To the extent made possible by protocols or agreement, they will allow the
     transfer of the management of an individual’s name to another federated
     organization of the individual’s choosing.

  c. They agree to make available to the best of their ability the facilities
     associated with naming, in particular the ability to freely perform discovery of
     the mechanisms for communication.

2. The freedom of communication – the ability for individuals and communities to
   share information between federated systems – is considered a fundamental
   right.

3. The principles of data interchange are as follows:

  a. The protocols that enable and facilitate federated identity and federated
     communication shall be agreed to by independent standards bodies and must
     be free of legal obligations or copyright or patent claims.

  b. Federated instances agree to conform to the standards in order to promote
     the flow of communication, to the extent possible.

  c. Neither (a) nor (b) prevent the creation of new standards or approaches to
     identity or communication

  d. As de-facto standards emerge, they shall be subject to and adhered to by
     federated services and software per clause (1) and (2) of this section.



Community Support

In recognition of

1. the importance of the wider fediverse

2. the labour and costs associated with creating and maintaining federated
   systems and standards 

3. the ongoing need to defend the principles of federated communities

commercial federated services that agree to this convention agree to tithe

1. to wholly independent trusts, foundations, or non-profits whose charters are
   to support the continued maintenance and development of code, policy and legal
   structures associated with and in support of the fediverse in accordance with
   this charter

2. at the point of initially federating with the fediverse, an amount according
   to the prevailing custom in the form of financial securities in the member
   organization

3. and at recurring intervals, an amount according to the prevailing custom, and
   in consideration of the organization’s financial ability to contribute.

4. This obligation should be construed to have fiduciary priority over
   shareholders’ rights, as it is intended as a form of voluntary taxation in
   support of the immense benefits conferred by participating in the Fediverse.



Future Considerations

In light of the many diverse possibilities afforded by the fediverse and the
complex relationship between content created by individuals and
community-generated datasets, this statement intentionally omits discussion of
data portability, copyright, privacy, and any other jurisdictionally necessary
questions of legal compliance.



Caveats

Nothing above should be construed to prevent federated communities from
restricting or limiting federation in order to protect themselves or their
members against abuse or to apply community standards. However, federated
identities must be made available online according to the wishes of the
individual, and the ability for any individuals to communicate using their
assigned identifiers must not be restricted.



Author

Blaine Cook, blaine@mastodon.social, November 19, 2022.